
---
.title = "Documentation",
.date = @date("2020-07-06T00:00:00"),
.author = "Sample Author",
.draft = false,
.layout = "documentation.html",
.tags = [],
--- 
## Multilingual Websites 

To create a multilingual website, use `addMultilingualWebsite` in your
`build.zig`, like in the following example.

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const zine = @import("zine");

pub fn build(b: *std.Build) !void {
    try zine.addMultilingualWebsite(b, .{
        .host_url = "https://kristoff.it",
        .layouts_dir_path = "layouts",
        .static_dir_path = "static",
        .i18n_dir_path = "i18n",
        .variants = &.{
            .{
                .locale_code = "en_US",
                .output_prefix_override = "",
                .title = "Loris Cro's Blog",
                .content_dir_path = "content",
            },

            .{
                .locale_code = "it_IT",
                .title = "Loris 🤌 Cro's 🤌 Blog",
                .content_dir_path = "content_it",
            },
        },
    });
}
```
### Localized variants
Each variant can define the following fields:

#### `locale_code`
A `language_NATION` string, e.g. `en_US`, `en_UK`, `it_IT`, `ja_JP`.

#### `title`
Site title for this variant.

#### `content_dir_path` 
Content directory with translated versions of your content.

#### `host_url_override` (optional)
The default assumption in Zine is that all your localized variants will be
deployed on the same host, with each translation made available under a `locale_code` prefix:

- `https://site.com/en_US/about/`
- `https://site.com/it_IT/about/`

Some users might want instead to serve each translation from a different hostname:

- `https://us.site.com/about/`
- `https://it.site.com/about/`

Setting `host_url_override` for each localized variant will make Zine generate
permalinks accordingly. 

#### `output_prefix_override` (optional)
This field can be used to override the path prefix for a localized variant.
When `host_url_override` is set to null, the default prefix for each localized
variant is `locale_code`. When `host_url_override` is set to a non-null value,
the default prefix is "" (empty string).

You can set `output_prefix_override` to any string to place a localized variant
under an arbitrary prefix. Setting it to an empty string is a good way of creating
a "default variant" of the website.

For example by setting `ouptput_prefix_override` to emptry string in `en_US` this
is the resulting site layout:

- `https://site.com/about/`
- `https://site.com/it_IT/about/`


Here's a table with more examples:

<style id="prefix_override">
  style#prefix_override + table {
    font-size: 0.9em;
  }
  style#prefix_override + table th {
    font-size: 1em;
  }
  style#prefix_override + table td {
    white-space: nowrap;
  }
</style>

|  output prefix override |     host url override     |     resulting url prefix    |      output prefix     |
| :------: | :-----------: | :--------------- | :-------------- |
|   null   |      null     | /en-US/  | zig-out/en-US/  |
|   null   | "us.site.com" | /        | zig-out/en-US/  |
|   "foo"  |      null     | /foo/    | zig-out/foo/    |
|   "foo"  | "us.site.com" | /foo/    | zig-out/foo/    |
|    ""    |      null     | /        | zig-out/        |


### The i18n Directory
When creating a multilingual website, the assumption is that the same layouts
and static content will be reused across all localized variants, while the 
content folder will vary for each. 

Varying the content folder will allow you to create different translations of 
your content, but that alone is not enough to provide translated versions of 
your site.

The `i18n` directory must contain a Ziggy file for each of your localized variants
that will then be made available in order to provide translations for phrases 
present in your layouts.

Localized variants and translation files are matched using the `locale_code` field.

**`$tree i18n`**
```
i18n
├── en_US.ziggy
└── it_IT.ziggy
```

Each file contains a Ziggy map that can then be accessed from your layouts as `$i18n`.

**`$cat i18n/it_IT.ziggy`**
```ziggy
{
 "back2top": "Ritorna in cima",
 "hello": "Ciao {}!",
}
```

Normal Scripty builtin functions are perfect for basic access to translations in layouts.

***translation with default value***
```html
<a href="#top" var="$i18n.get('back2top', 'Back to Top')"></a>
```

***error if translation is missing***
```html
<a href="#top" var="$i18n.get!('back2top')"></a>
```

***render element only if the key is present***
```html
<div if="$i18n.get?('back2top')">
  <a href="#top" var="$if"></a>
</div>
```

***format translated entry** (`fmt` is a string builtin)* 
```html
<p var="$i18n.get!('hello').fmt($page.author)"></p>
```

### Discovering translations
To discover other translatons for the same page, you can use `$page.translations()`.
Refer to the Scripty reference to see how to use the resulting value.

Consider the following directory structure:

```
content
├── about.md
├── docs
│   └── index.md
└── index.md
content_it
├── about.md
├── pasta.md
├── docs.md
└── index.md
```

- `index.md` and `about.md` are matched because they have the same
path (respective to the each content directory). 
- `pasta.md` is not matched with any other page because it has a unique relative 
path.
- `docs.md` is not matched with any other page because, even though the resulting
url path would be the same as `docs/index.md`, the *content path* is different.

That said, it is possible to match any page with any other by defining `translation_key` in
the Ziggy frontmatter of each page.

This last way of matching pages is meant to be used when URL paths are also translated,
for example:

- `https://site.com/en_US/contact-us/`
- `https://site.com/it_IT/contattaci/`

The following frontmatter key must be set in both "contact us" pages:
```ziggy
.translation_key = "contact form"
```

The value can be any string value, as long as it is unique per each localized variant.

